---
layout: article
title: The Poison of Religion
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-06-14 9:00am
--- 

One of the strongest critiques of religion in general and of Christianity in particular came from Christopher Hitchens in his best selling book _God is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything_. Hitchens went to great lengths, in person and in print, to defend the subtitle of his book: _How Religion Poisons Everything_. For Hitchens, this was not a provocative attempt to generate book sales, it was the most important truth to be proclaimed and defended. Christopher Hitchens faced countless religious opponents who persistently argued that there is some good that religion has done (many argued that it’s done more good than bad), and that religion certainly doesn’t poison everything. Nevertheless Hitchens was unwavering, never backing down and never weakening his thesis or his resolve to defend it. Hitchens did, and many others do, really believe that religion is what poisons people to do some of the most unspeakable atrocities in history.

While many Christians have pushed back on the thesis that _Religion Poisons Everything_, I think Christopher Hitchens had a point. When people get religious, they tend to feel like they have the truth, and everyone else is blind; they tend to think that they’re living the right way, and everyone else is living the wrong way. There is always a divide between us and them, and this is very poisonous indeed. Timothy Keller describes this well in _The Reason for God_:

> “Religion, generally speaking, tends to create a slippery slope in the heart. Each religion informs its followers that they have ‘the truth’, and this naturally leads them to feel superior to those with differing beliefs. Also, a religion tells its followers that they are saved and connected to God by devotedly performing that truth. This moves them to separate from those who are less devoted and pure in life. Therefore, it is easy for one religious group to stereotype and caricature other ones. Once this situation exists it can easily spiral down into the marginalisation of others or even to active oppression, abuse, or violence against them.” (Timothy Keller, _The Reason for God_, p4)

The poison of religious self-righteousness has been an undeniable factor of some of the worst atrocities committed in human history. Many have labelled this as the strongest argument against the existence of God: if God is so good, then why are his followers so evil? Given the weight of historical evidence, this is indeed a very strong argument. However, it is important to remember that the poison of self-righteousness isn’t always religious. The problem is actually much bigger than religion. The problem lies in any and every worldview that says “_this_ is what’s going to be good for human flourishing, and _that_ is what’s going to be harmful for society” (an essential part of every worldview). When this judgment call is made, those who are doing what is good for human flourishing are praised, and those who are doing what is harmful for society are demonised. There is an _us_ and a _them_, and we, the ones who are doing what we deem to be good, move to separate, stereotype and caricature they, the ones who are doing what we deem to be bad. Once this situation exists it can easily spiral down into the marginalisation of others or even to active oppression, abuse, or violence against them.

Given that every worldview has a view of what’s going to be good for human flourishing and what’s going to be harmful for society, this seems to be an insurmountable problem. How can we refrain from looking down on those who we genuinely believe are contributing to the problems of the world and the detriment of society? If you take pride in being a hard working person, then you can’t help but look down on people who you consider to be lazy. If you think it’s extremely important to be tolerant and open minded, then you can’t help but despise people who are intolerant and close minded. If you prize honesty, then you will dislike all liars. If you put the scientifically minded on a pedestal, then you will place the less scientifically minded people below them. There divide between _us_ and _them_ really does seem to be unavoidable. How can we value people who have very different ideas about what’s going to be good and bad for society?

What all of these worldviews have in common, is a justification by works. What justifies someone is what they do, whether it promotes human flourishing or hinders it. And so we look up to those who are doing good (as our worldview defines good), and look down on those who are doing bad (as our worldview defines bad). This is the essential ingredient of the path towards the oppression of the ‘Other’, and it is a core element of every religion and worldview that I’m aware of, except for one. Biblical Christianity teaches that Christians are saved purely by God’s grace (Romans 3:21-24; Ephesians 2:8), and so there’s no room for boasting on the basis of what we have done (Romans 3:27-28; Ephesians 2:9). Therefore, to the degree that the identity of the Christian is in God’s grace rather than their own works, they lose all disdain for people whose works aren’t up to their worldview’s standard. To the degree that we believe that we’re sinners saved by grace, we are forced to admit that our own works aren’t up to our own worldview’s standard. How can we who are sinners look down on other sinners? And how can we who believe that all people are made in the image of God (Genesis 1:27), so precious to him that Jesus died so that they might be saved (John 3:16), not value our fellow image bearers for whom God so loved that he sent his only Son?

If you know anyone who’s a Christian, you’ll know that the answer is: _very easily_. Christians are rarely consistent, and more often than not, we act as if what makes us great is our view of the truth, or our good works, or some other aspect about us, much like every other worldview. And so, many secular people label the argument that I have presented as a _No True Scotsman Fallacy_. If a Scotsman says “No Scotsman puts sugar on his porridge”, and another says “But my uncle Angus likes sugar on his porridge”, and then the first Scotsman says “Ah yes, but no _true_ Scotsman puts sugar on their porridge”, then they have committed a logical fallacy (modifying the subject of their assertion to exclude the counter example). It is argued that this is precisely what I’m doing here, saying “Ah yes, but no _true_ Christian looks down on people who don’t believe what they do.” This objection can certainly feel quite forceful, but it all depends on what a _true_ Christian is. In the example of the _No True Scotsman Fallacy_ above, if Angus was born in Norway rather than Scotland, he wouldn’t be a counter example to the original claim, for what makes a Scotsman a _true_ Scotsman, is being born in Scotland. What is it that makes someone a _true_ Christian? To demand that I am committing the same fallacy by distinguishing between people who genuinely believe the Bible’s teaching of salvation by grace alone, and those who merely refer to themselves as a Christian, is to demand that a _true_ Christian is anyone who calls themself a Christian, rather than those who actually believe it.

But it’s actually more complicated than that. People genuinely believe things that they don’t act in accordance with all the time. When a secular person says “thank God for that”, it doesn’t mean that they’re not a _true_ secular person, it just means that they’re using a figure of speech. While there are certainly people who are Christian in name only, there are many of us who genuinely believe, but continue to sin. Indeed, the gospel teachers that we are sinners saved by grace; it’s not that we’re any better than others, but that we admit that we’re bad enough to need a saviour. The church is not a museum for saints, but a hospital for sinners. The Bible itself declares that salvation doesn’t come to those who trust in their own standing and their own name, but rather “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Joel 2:32; Romans 10:13). However, this doesn’t mean that the gospel has no effect. Not only does the gospel show us the way to flatten the slippery slope in the human heart that leads to oppression, it actually moves us to do it. Jesus not only teachers his disciples to love their enemies and pray for those who persecute them (Matthew 5:44), he also puts it into practice by dying for us while we were still sinners (Romans 5:8), and praying for those who were persecuting him (Luke 23:34).

While the freeness of God’s salvation to us is what enables the Christian worldview to value people who disagree with it, the costliness of God’s salvation to Jesus is what moves Christians to put it into practice. Unlike other religions, _true_ Christianity teachers its adherents, not to obey _in order_ to be saved, but to obey _because_ we have been saved. Instead of being motivated by a reward for doing good, or punishment for failing to do it (justification by works), the gospel motivates Christians out of love and thanks for what Christ has done for us (justification by grace). This creates a unique dynamic where people are moved to love God and love their neighbour, not out of fear or pride, but out of joyful thanks. When we fail to love God and our neighbours, we’re only demonstrating that we haven’t understood the gospel. And every time that we hear the gospel, we’re spurred on towards love and good deeds, not in order to earn God’s favour (enabling us to look down on those who don’t have it), but because we already have God’s favour, given freely to us, at such an incredible cost him.

I think that Christopher Hitchens was right: religion really does poison everything. But it’s not just religion that poisons everything, it’s the justification by works that’s underneath both religious and secular worldviews. By contrast, the gospel that Jesus lived the life we should have lived, died the death we should have died, and rose that we should rise again, is the only cure that I know of for this poison that seems to have spread throughout the human race. The cure is not always swallowed, even when it is served on a weekly basis at church. But when it is digested it has the power to cure the self-righteousness that lies in every human heart. According to the gospel, our righteousness comes not from ourselves, but purely from the grace of God. Miroslav Volf describes this well in _Exclusion and Embrace_:

> “Hidden in the dark chambers of our hearts and nourished by the system of darkness, hate grows and seeks to infest everything with its hellish will to exclusion. In the light of the justice and love of God, however, hate recedes and the seed is planted for the miracle of forgiveness. Forgiveness flounders because I exclude the enemy from the community of humans even as I exclude myself from the community of sinners. But no one can be in the presence of the God of the crucified Messiah for long without overcoming this double exclusion without transposing the enemy from the sphere of monstrous inhumanity into the sphere of shared humanity and herself from the sphere of proud innocence into the sphere of common sinfulness.” (Miroslav Volf, _Exclusion and Embrace_, p124)

