---
layout: article
title: Isn’t God’s Morality ‘Might Makes Right’?
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-04-12 9:00am
--- 

In the quest for defining, establishing and justifying our ethical frameworks, most people see the very big difficulties with the view that ‘might makes right’ – the view that whoever is in power can dictate what is right and what is wrong. In the past, when kings, queens, and those in power have been given (or have taken) the right to lay down the law and silence all voices that would oppose them, we’ve seen that this keen of absolute power corrupts absolutely. This is how bullying works, and it’s how tyrants and dictators operate: their ‘might makes right’, and they don’t have to listen have any would criticise their decisions. This is also the kind of corruption that democracy seeks to avoid, if leaders are regularly voted in by the public then they have to listen to the public. They can’t just force their views onto those who disagree with them.

However, if God is ‘The Almighty’, literally the one with the most ‘might’, and if his holy word trumps the word of humans in establishing what is right and what is wrong, then isn’t this ‘might makes right’? In fact, isn’t this the ultimate example of ‘might makes right’? If God is going to judge everyone on the last day, and no one can escape his judgement or overturn his decisions, then isn’t God’s final judgement day the ultimate in ‘might makes right’? How is this any different to tyrants and dictators silencing those who disagree with them by sheer force? A number of thoughtful atheists have suggested that if God is going to be judging people according to his standards, and if there’s no room to appeal this process because he is ‘The Almighty’, then this is the biggest and most significant example of ‘might makes right’ in history.

However, this suggestion is simply not engaging with theism as theism. At best, it is trying to engage with theism as if it were deism. In a deistic universe where God wound up the clock and then walked away, his view of good and evil (if you could ever get it out of him) could be seen as one opinion among many, maybe. But in a theistic universe where God is involved in his creation, God’s view of good and evil isn’t one voice among many, it is the view of the one who created the universe as a moral universe where there is objective good and evil. The accusation of ‘might makes right’ assumes that there’s no objective right or wrong, but that people ‘make right’ and wrong for themselves, and the usage of the phrase points out that ‘might’ doesn’t necessarily qualify someone to say what ‘makes’ something ‘right’ or wrong for others. In other words, the accusation assumes a kind of moral relativism (there’s no objective good and evil), whereas theism assumes a kind of moral realism (there is an objective good and evil). It would make sense if God’s view was one amongst many and he was asserting it solely because he is mightier than us, but it doesn’t make sense if he is the one who created the universe as a moral universe in which there really is objective good and evil. If indeed this is the case, then God doesn’t have another moral opinion, he reveals moral truth.

The accusation is often presented in what’s called [the Euthyphro dilemma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euthyphro_dilemma). The story goes that when Euthyphro argued that we can know what is good and what is evil when we’re told from above, Socrates asked him “Is the good (lit. pious) loved by the gods because it is good, or is it good because it is loved by the gods?” Many think that this presents a serious problem to a theistic account of good and evil, but it is nothing more than asking the question of moral realism or moral relativism: Does God say something is good because it is good (moral realism), or is it good because God says it is (moral relativism)? Simply asking the question is very different from answering it. But the real problems arise when the two answers are confused. If you assume that God’s judgement isn’t a judgement of actual good and evil, but simply God asserting his view over and against yours, then you’re assuming a moral relativism that theism doesn’t share. An argument that makes the assumption that theism is false, in order to point out a difficulty with theism, isn’t actually an argument against theism, it’s the assertion of a different worldview. There’s nothing wrong with asserting a different worldview, but in order to engage with theism you have to be able to understand what is says about the objectivity of morality, or you’re just going to be talking past people who disagree with you.

Some argue that if God says that something is good because it is good (as theism suggests), then good and evil can be understood independently of God. If there is an objective good and evil, then why do we need God to tell us what that is? Surely we could, at least in theory, find it our own. Not quite. If, as theism suggests, God made this universe as a moral universe where there is objective good and evil, then morality can’t be cleanly divorced from the God who wove it into the universe anymore than a watch’s proper use can be divorced from the one who designed it. If a watch is made for the purpose of keeping time, then it’s a good watch if keeps accurate time, and a bad watch if it doesn’t. You can’t say it’s a bad watch because it broke when you tried to use it as a hammer, what made it good was its achievement of its purpose, not its achievement (or lack thereof) of yours.

Some suggest that this would mean that there would be no way of knowing if God were in fact evil, and all of his followers were deceived by God. Again, this isn’t really engaging with theism as theism, or at least it isn’t engaging with Christian theism. The Bible invites us to “taste and see that the Lord is good” (Psalm 34:8). It suggests that we all have a moral compass (Romans 2:14-15) that enables us to see and understand the difference between moral north (well-being) and south (harm). However, contrary to what some atheists argue, this is not enough to establish any kind of basis for ethics. People have wildly different views as to what constitutes well-being, and what harm should be avoided. As a basis for ethics, they are nothing more than the empty tautologies that it’s good to do good (well-being), and bad to do bad (harm). Our moral compasses work well enough to recognise obvious good and evil, but they’re very easily skewed by our desires, biases and selfishness so that we have significant disagreements about ethics, law and morality.

Everyone has moral feelings (I think x is good, I’m going to do x; I think y is bad, I’m not going to do y), but when we have different moral feelings, how can we establish moral obligation (you ought to do x, or you’re not permitted to do y, regardless of your own moral feelings)? If God does not exist then we are always left with the question: what objective standard are you pointing to, to adjudicate between you’re moral feelings, and the moral feelings of those who disagree with you, or are you just saying that your moral feelings are superior? This question is unavoidable, and if atheism is true, then it is also unanswerable. As Arthur Leff famously pointed out:

> “At that point, you see, we are really forced to see ourselves as lawmakers rather than law finders, and we are immediately led into a regress that is, fatally, not infinite. We can say that a valid legal system must have some minimum process for rational determination and operation. We can say that the majority cannot consistently disadvantage any minority. We can say that, whatever else a majority can do, it cannot systematically prevent a minority from seeking to become a majority. We can say all sorts of things, but what we cannot say is why one say is better than any other, unless we state some standard by which it definitely is. To put it as bluntly as possible, if we go to find what law ought to govern us, and if what we find is not an authoritative Holy Writ but just ourselves, just people, making that law, how can we be governed by what we have found?” (Arthur Leff, [_Unspeakable Ethics, Unnatural Law_](http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3810&context=fss_papers))

If, on the other hand, there is an authoritative Holy word (and for many, this is a big if), then it can serve as an objective moral standard that people can point to, to adjudicate between our moral feelings, and the moral feelings of those who disagree with us. As Martin Luther King Junior wrote in his [_Letter from Birmingham Jail_](http://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html): “How does one determine whether a law is just or unjust? A just law is a man made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony with the moral law.

Finally, while the advancement of science has enabled us to do things that were never previously possible, contrary to the beliefs of some, it isn’t able to establish a basis for ethics. Science can tell us a great deal about what _is_, but it cannot tell us anything about what we _ought_ to do, and as [Hume famously argued](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Is-ought_problem), you cannot deduce an ought statement from an is statement. Medical science can tell you whether a certain treatment _is_ going to save or kill, but it can never tell you whether you _ought_ to administer it. Medical science is completely silent on ethics, if it said anything either way, it would have ended the debates about abortion and euthanasia for all who hold science to be a firm foundation for knowledge. As philosopher put it: “I don’t see any moral realism position that adequately answers the is/ought divide without merely handwaving.”

This is a pretty uncomfortable place to be in. When we see injustice we don’t say “that _feels_ wrong”, we say “that _is_ wrong”. While theism well explains the ubiquitous pursuit of moral obligation, atheism is often forced to explain it away. We generally feel like there is an objective good and evil, but how can we talk about objective good and evil without talking about an objective purpose that we were made for? If what makes a watch, a good watch, is its achievement of its purpose (keeping accurate time), then what makes a person a good person? If we weren’t created for any particular purpose, then your guess is as good as mine. But if we were made for the purpose of mutual love relationships with God, and with each other, then loving God and loving your neighbour are not merely moral suggestions, but rather “all the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.” (Matthew 22:37-40)



