---
layout: article
title: The Psychology of the Spell
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-06-28 9:00am
--- 

Many people in the west view religion as a cultural phenomenon/construction. Building on Freud’s understanding of religion as a psychological projection, a number of atheists argue that people believe in God because we evolved to develop a hyper agency detection (if we don’t understand it, someone has to be behind it), and so cultures naturally formed stories and beliefs about God to cope with what they didn’t understand. Religion is therefore a spell to be broken. This is the view that Daniel Dennett argues for in his book _Breaking the Spell_: “Religions are transmitted culturally, through language and symbolism, not through the genes. You may get your father’s nose and your mother’s musical ability through your genes, but if you get your religion from your parents, you get it the way you get your language, through upbringing.” (Daniel Dennett, _Breaking the Spell_, p24-25)

When you out look across the globe, religions do indeed to appear to be clustered geographically. Hinduism is understood as an Indian religion, Buddhism as an Asian way of life, and Islam appears to be tied to various cultures, most of them in the Middle East. When you look out across history, the argument is even stronger. After thousands of years, the centre of Judaism remains in Israel, the capital of Islam is still Mecca, Buddhism is still centred in Asia, and Hinduism hasn’t really moved from the sub-continent of India. The study of the relationship between human thought, and the social context within which it arises is called the _sociology of knowledge_, and it has been used as a very powerful argument for understanding religions as cultural constructions. However, this argument doesn’t only apply to religions, it can equally be applied to any and every worldview. As Peter Berger, one of the founders of the sociology of knowledge, points out:

> “The _past_, out of which the tradition comes, is relativised in terms of this or that socio-historical analysis. The _present_, however, remains strangely immune from relativisation. In other words, the New Testament writers are seen as afflicted with a false consciousness rooted in their time, but the contemporary analyst takes the consciousness of _his_ time as an unmixed intellectual blessing. The electricity- and radio-users are placed intellectually above the Apostle Paul. This is rather funny. More importantly, in the perspective of the sociology of knowledge, it is an extraordinarily one-sided way of looking at things. What was good for the first century is good for the twentieth. The worldview of the New Testament writers was constructed and maintained by the same kind of social processes that construct and maintain the world view of contemporary “radical” theologians. Each has its appropriate plausibility structure, its plausibility-maintaining mechanisms. If this is understood, then the appeal to _any_ alleged modern consciousness loses most of its persuasiveness – unless, of course, one can bring oneself to believe that modern consciousness is indeed the embodiment of superior cognitive powers.” (Peter Berger, _A Rumor of Angels_, p41)

When we look out across the globe, the phenomenon of atheism in general and the worldview of naturalism in particular, are very much clustered among white western culture. While some argue that the world is getting more secular, the reality is that it’s mostly white people who are getting more secular. When you look out across history, the argument is even stronger. Throughout history there has always been pockets of atheism and naturalism, but in terms of world history, there appears to be a very strong correlation between their acceptance/embrace and modern western culture. This correlation has led to the _secularisation thesis_: that people get more secular as they get more modern and scientific. However, this has largely been abandoned as large populations of people in Africa, South America, and Asia in particular, have become more modern and scientific, but not more secular. The evidence suggests that secularism appears to be tied to western culture, rather than modern and scientific advancements.

But to what extent is Christianity tied to culture? Some would argue a lot, but there is a growing body of evidence that suggests that Christianity transcends and permeates culture in a way that other religions and worldviews do not. When you out look across the globe, approximately 25% of the world’s Christians live in Europe, 25% in Central and South America, 22% in Africa, 15% and growing in Asia, and 12-15% in North America. When you look out across history, the argument is even stronger. The centre of Christianity was originally in Jerusalem, but it has moved through the Roman Empire, Europe, North America, and now Christianity is growing fastest in Asia, Africa and South America. Unlike other religions and worldviews, the centre of Christianity keeps moving around world. This has led some scholars, like Richard Bauckham, to conclude that “Whatever defines Christianity as a historical world phenomenon, cultural homogeneity is not likely to be such a feature. Almost certainly Christianity exhibits more cultural diversity than any other religion and that must say something about it.” (Richard Bauckham, _Bible and Mission_, p8-9)

An African scholar, Lamin Sanneh, makes the same point in _Whose Religion Is Christianity?_: “The worldwide Christian resurgence is proof of the religion transcending ethnic, national, and cultural barriers.” (Lamin Sanneh, _Whose Religion Is Christianity?_ p7) As a native African, he contrasts how African people heard the appeals made by Europeans to adopt European culture, and how they heard the appeals made by Christian missionaries to put their trust in Jesus: “African people sensed in their hearts that Jesus did not mock their respect for the sacred or their clamour for an invincible Saviour, and so they beat their sacred drums for him until the stars skipped and danced in the skies. After that dance the stars weren’t little anymore. Christianity helped Africans to become renewed Africans, not remade Europeans.” (Lamin Sanneh, _Whose Religion Is Christianity?_ p43) According to Sanneh, Christianity isn’t tied to any one culture, but rather, it transcends and permeates all cultures in a way that no other religion or worldview does.

The sociology of knowledge provides us with a very powerful argument against beliefs and worldviews that are tied to certain cultures. Logically, it should make us especially suspicious of _our_ culture’s beliefs and dominant worldviews, since its central tenant is that people are blind to their own cultural assumptions and views. If you’re part of a religious culture, than an awareness of the sociology of knowledge should make you question your religious assumptions. But if we’re part of an increasingly secular culture, then it should make us question our secular views, rather than the religious views of other cultures. To point the finger at every culture except for our own, would be to completely miss the point, as well as the opportunity to rise above the fog of our cultural assumptions which the sociology of knowledge provides. Breaking the spell of other cultural beliefs and worldviews is trivially easy. However, in order to achieve any benefit for yourself, you need to be willing to break the spell of your own cultural beliefs and views. Understanding the relationship between human thought and the social context within which it arises, equips us with a very powerful argument against views that arise in certain cultures. However, when we look out across the globe and across world history, it appears to be a much more devastating argument against atheism and naturalism, than it is against Christianity.
