---
layout: article
title: The Randomness Of Grace
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-04-08 9:00am
--- 

While most religions and worldviews have a salvation of works or a merit system of rewards and punishments; The Christian worldview uniquely teaches that our salvation is by grace alone. The New Testament says that Christians are “chosen by grace. And if by grace, then it cannot be based on works; if it were, grace would no longer be grace.” (Romans 11:5-6). But for many, this raises a significant problem: if there’s no reason or rhyme behind God’s choice, if it really is unconditional election, then how is it different from sheer randomness? Is God just randomly selecting some but not others?

I’m convinced that the answer is no, for several reasons. First of all, when pushed, there’s a lot of problems with the concept of randomness. We use the word ‘random’ to describe things that which seem to have unknown causes, or causes that are too complex for us to calculate; but at bottom, there’s actually no such thing as randomness. If someone tosses a coin, the result can be calculated fairly easily if the speed of the coin and the speed of its rotation are known. When someone rolls a dice – which is about as random as it gets – its trajectory can be modelled and the result can actually be calculated, if the dice’s angular velocity is known, as well as the hardness of the surface it lands on. When the calculations are too complex for us to do it in our heads we call it random, but there’s actually no such thing. Many have been convinced of this ever since we realised that computers can’t actually produce random numbers, the best they can do is take the number of milliseconds in the past second, and put it through a formula to get a number in the desired range. Even what we call ‘random mutations’ are actually mutations due to chemical, biological, and environmental factors. There simply is no such thing as a random event.

So then, if God’s election isn’t random, and if it doesn’t depend on our goodness or our works, what does it depend on? The Bible’s answer is that it depends on God’s mercy (Romans 9:16). God chooses to love the unlovely, and save the unworthy, but this doesn’t mean that his choice is anything like someone throwing darts blindfolded. God’s choice is relational. He is moved by love, mercy and compassion towards those whom he has chosen to save from the beginning, not because of anything intrinsically good about them, but because he is intrinsically gracious and merciful.

R.C. Sproul has a very helpful way of explaining this to a young Christian who has issues with God’s gracious choice. Sproul asked her “Why do you think you’re a Christian, but you’re roommate isn’t a Christian?” She replied “Because I accepted Christ.” To this Sproul said “Right. But why did you accept Christ, while she didn’t? She said “Well, I repented of my sins.” Sproul continues “Right. But why did you repent while she didn’t?” She replied “Well, I was willing to humble myself, but she wasn’t.” Sproul kept pressing this, saying “Right. But why were you willing to humble yourself? Are you really saying that there’s something better about you?” Humanly speaking, people become Christians in different ways and through different means; but if Christianity is indeed true, then ultimately, it’s not because there’s something better about us, but because God is gracious to us.

However, for many this doesn’t solve the problem at all. The question remains, why is God merciful to some and not others? Isn’t it irreducibly unfair for God to give some people what they deserve, and pour out his grace – which is undeserved by definition – on others? Jesus answers this question in the parable of the workers in the vineyard (Matthew 20:1-16). When the owner of the vineyard generously pays those who had worked for the last hour of the day, the same amount as those who had worked the whole day – the amount they had agreed to work for – the owners fairness is called into question. If the owner is generous to some, we feel he should be equally generous to all. Indeed, if someone gives something bad or undesirable to another when they don’t deserve it, this is very unfair. But to demand that it’s also unfair to give something good or desirable to some and not others, is to misunderstand the nature of [generosity](http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/generous): “a readiness to give more of something than is strictly necessary or expected.” To argue that it’s unfair to be generous towards some without being equally generous towards everyone, is to argue against all charity, mercy and undeserved kindness.

Moreover, the offer of God’s mercy is open to everyone. To those who insist on standing on their own record and merits: “God will repay each person according to what they have done” (Romans 2:6). That’s about as fair as you can get. However, according to the Bible, this doesn’t put us in the favourable standing with God that we would like to think that it does (Romans 3:9-18). And so God intervenes in human history to satisfy the requirements of justice, while at the same time offering forgiveness and mercy to those who are undeserving of it (Romans 3:21-26). This, I think, is infinitely more fair than demanding that those who come from disadvantaged backgrounds and abusive parents, meet some standard of goodness that we who come from relatively wealthy backgrounds and loving families, feel that we can meet. God’s offer of grace is open to everyone who is humble enough to see their need for it. Indeed, “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Romans 10:13).
