---
layout: article
title: The Uncertainty Of Faith
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-03-29 9:00am
--- 

One of the issues that people have with Christianity is its uncertainty. The scientific method of observation and experiment can give us compelling reasons to accept or reject certain claims, and many people feel that the reasons for belief in Christianity are significantly lacking by comparison. Indeed, lots of people understand “faith” to be belief in something for which you have no evidence: if you had evidence for it, you wouldn’t need to have faith.

However, this is neither what faith means, nor how it is used by people who have faith. According to the [Oxford dictionary](http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/faith), faith is belief without proof, but this is very different from belief without evidence. In [a conversation between Richard Dawkins and John Lennox](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dW70eQBn85Q), Dawkins said “We only need to use the word faith when there isn’t any evidence”, to which Lennox replied “Not at all, I presume you’ve got faith in your wife, is there any evidence for that?” To this Dawkins answered “Yes, plenty of evidence”, and Lennox said “It’s the same with mine, Richard, it’s the same with mine.” The faith that we have in other people is not blind faith, it’s based on evidence. And it’s the same with the faith that Christians have in Jesus, it’s not a blind stab in the dark, it’s based on the evidence we have for Jesus Christ.

According to Christianity, faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see (Hebrews 11:1).At its heart, it’s a trust/reliance/dependence on the person and work of Jesus for our standing before God, rather than on our own record. Christianity cannot be proved, and so becoming a Christian requires faith, but it’s certainly not a blind faith that takes a leap in the dark despite all evidence to the contrary. Christian faith is based on good historical evidence: “That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched – this we proclaim concerning the Word of life. The life appeared; we have seen it and testify to it, and we proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and has appeared to us. We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard, so that you also may have fellowship with us.” (1 John 1:1-3).

Unfortunately for modern skeptics, the evidence for Christianity isn’t scientific, it’s historical. While many would prefer the evidence for God to be scientific, I don’t think you can fault Christianity for not providing scientific evidence for something that science restricts itself from saying anything about. According to the National Academy of Science: “Science is a way of knowing about the natural world. It is limited to explaining the natural world through natural causes. Science can say nothing about the supernatural. Whether God exists or not, is a question about which science is neutral.” To demand that there be scientific evidence for God, is to misunderstand the very nature of science.

Moreover, limiting the search for God to the scientific realm; is effectively turning a blind eye to all possible evidence for God that can’t be reproduced in a lab. But if God is the all-powerful creator of the universe, why would we assume that we could put God in a test tube, or that he would come into our particular lab and reveal himself under our microscope? As Alvin Plantinga points out: “The naturalist who demands that the evidence for God be scientific, is like a drunk who will only look for his keys under a certain street light, despite losing his keys in an alley. In fact, he goes the drunk one better, he demands that his keys can’t _exist_ unless they’re under his favorite street light.”

If there really is a God, the only way we could ever know anything about him is if he revealed himself to us. Sitting in a room and thinking about what God should be like, and then putting confidence in your conception of God, is taking a step of blind faith. But the claim of Christianity is that God has revealed himself to us in human history. “In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe” (Hebrews 1:1-2). This is not blind faith, its faith based on the historical evidence for the person and work of Jesus Christ.

However, Christian faith is not merely giving intellectual assent to certain doctrines, it is a relationship. It’s like a marriage or a close friendship: you have faith in the other person based on what they’ve done, and that moves you to act in love towards them. However, there’s always an uncertainty in relationships, we can never be sure if committing to a particular relationship will work out for us in the end. And yet, if you want to experience the intimacy of marriage, you have to propose, or at least accept a proposal, without having 100% certainty of the future. If you don’t, they may just marry someone else. Similarly, if you’re going to hire someone, examining their resume and references can to get you to probability, but you have to commit to hiring the person to gain any certainty about whether or not they’re the right person for the job.

Why would we expect it to be any different with God? If relationship with God is anything like our relationships with other people, then we should expect reason and evidence to be able to get you to probability, but we would also expect the feeling of certainty to require a commitment. As Charles Spurgeon put it: “Faith is taking the first step even when you don’t see the whole staircase.” Crucially, you have to be able to see some of the staircase in order to take the first step, but we don’t yet see the whole staircase. We don’t have the proof that we would like, but the person and work Jesus gives us good reason to take the first step of faith.

Often the question comes up, how much faith do you need in order to be saved? Jesus’ answer is that your faith can be as small as a mustard seed (Luke 17:6). Salvation doesn’t depend on the quantity of our faith, but on the object of our faith. If you were at the edge of a cliff and your feet started slipping, how much faith would you need to reach out and grab hold of a plant to stop you from falling? You have to have enough faith to reach out and grab it, but your level of certainty about the plant is not going to save you. The strength of the plant’s roots is what stops you from perishing. Similarly, Christianity holds that it’s not the quantity of faith that saves us, but the object of our faith – Jesus’ death and resurrection. All you need is enough faith to be able to reach out and take hold of it. However, this doesn’t mean that stronger faith is of no value. As Spurgeon puts it: “Little faith will bring your souls to Heaven, but great faith will bring Heaven to your souls.”

While other religious founders said things along the lines of “I’m God’s prophet come to help you find God”, Jesus Christ effectively said “I’m God come to find you.” If Jesus is who he claimed to be, then a relationship with him would have to be best way, not just to know about God, but to actually know God. Instead of projecting our ideas about God onto him, Jesus claimed to be the exact image and representation of God’s being made manifest to us (John 14:5-11; Colossians 1:15-19; Hebrews 1:3). This is very different from believing what we want to believe, it’s believing Jesus’ revelation of God based on his life, death, and resurrection. As Jesus himself said: “The words I say to you I do not speak on my own authority. Rather, it is the Father, living in me, who is doing his work. Believe me when I say that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; or at least _believe on the evidence_ of the works themselves.” (John 14:10-11).


