---
layout: article
title: Old Testament Atrocities
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-03-15
--- 

One of the biggest issues that skeptics have with Christianity is what's often referred to as Old Testament atrocities. Many of the stories in the Bible – especially stories involving God's judgment – seem overly brutal and atrocious to modern enlightened people, and so the Bible is often written off as primitive and outdated. However, these type of objections often stem from caricatures and misreading the Bible that don't actually engage with what the Bible is communicating. It's a little bit like someone writing a scathing review of a 3 hour film, after watching a single 5 minute scene – things are taken out of context, and the overall message isn't understood let alone engaged with. 

First of all, the Bible has lots of examples of what the author's refer to as “sin”. For example, objecting to the example of Lot offering his two daughters to be raped by the men of Sodom so that they might spare his visitors (Genesis 19:6-8), is to agree with the Bible's view of wickedness (Genesis 18:20-33). This is not an example to follow, but an example of sin (Deuteronomy 22:25-26). Another example of this is the story of Jephthah who sacrifices his daughter because of an oath that he had made (Judges 11:30-40), even though the Old Testament law has an escape clause for Jephthah's situation (Leviticus 5:4-7). Jephthah's actions are never approved of by God or the narrator of the story, child sacrifice is unanimously condemned throughout the Bible (Jeremiah 32:35).

Other instances are a little bit more subtle. For example, some people see the stories in the book of Genesis involving polygamy and primogeniture (favouring the first born son), and object to it as being primitive and outdated. However, Robert Alter – an expert in ancient Hebrew narrative – argues that if you conclude that the book of Genesis is pro-polygamy or primogeniture, you simply haven't learned how to read. The characters are constantly falling into crisis precisely because of their practice of polygamy and primogeniture. The narratives of the Bible are exposing problems of these practices, not commending them.

Another common objection is that the Bible condones slavery. Indeed, slavery is a horrible practice and I would hate for this to be misread as a defense of slavery in any sense, but it needs to be said that the Bible's conception of slavery is worlds apart from what modern readers, this side of the horrific new world slavery, think of when we hear the word “slavery”. In biblical times, slavery was much more like indentured servant hood. If you fell into debt you had to sell yourself into slavery until your debt was paid, there was no such thing as bankruptcy. According to the Bible, slavery through kidnapping was a capital offence (Exodus 21:16), the only slavery that was allowed was indentured servant hood. If a slave was struck and he lost a tooth, he was to be set free (Exodus 21:27). Killing a slave was a capital offence (Exodus 21:12). Slavery was never for life, but for 7 years at the most (Deuteronomy 15:12-15). Slavery was never allowed to break up a family, masters had to take in their servant's spouse, and both had to be freed together (Exodus 21:3). Slaves had the right to take their masters to court if they violated their rights (Job 31:13-15). And if a slave fled from their master because of abuse, they weren't allowed to be returned but had to be relocated to live wherever they chose. (Deuteronomy 23:15-16). In other words, what the Bible describes as slavery is very different to what most people think of when they hear the word “slavery”.

When it comes to slavery, the Old Testament law exercises a retrieval ethic – retrieving the good from a bad situation. Like the just war theory that acknowledges the reality of war and seeks to eliminate horrible injustices in war like torture, the Old Testament acknowledges the reality of sin expressed in things like slavery and divorce, and lays down rules to eliminate horrible injustices that often arise from them, without ever holding them up as something good (Leviticus 25:53-54, Mark 10:4-6). Given that slavery in biblical times was more like indentured servant hood, the Bible didn't seek to abolish it completely. But when the Bible goes after slavery, it goes after the real evil of slavery – treating another person as sub-human. Jesus said “You know that those who are regarded as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them. Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be slave of all. For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.” (Mark 10:42-45)

Another significant issue for modern readers of the Bible is the commands for Israel to wage war against the Canaanites. People often read these commands and conclude that the Bible is pro-genocide. However, when God tells the Israel to fight against the nations, it's not because God is genocidal, but because of the justice of God and the wickedness of the nations. Israel is only to wage war against them when their sin had reached its full measure (Genesis 15:16), and they are forbidden from benefiting from the destruction of the Canaanites (Deuteronomy 7:25), instead they are commanded to be an instrument of God's justice (Deuteronomy 9:4). Indeed, when Israel becomes like the nations in wickedness and brutality, God raises up the nations against them as well (2 Kings 17:17-20).

Moreover, the Old Testament hope is for a conquering King who's going to overcome evil in the world, and according to the authors of the New Testament this hope is finally fulfilled in the person and work of Jesus Christ. However, much to the surprise of the Jews, Jesus doesn't set out to destroy evil in whatever nation it lies; he sets out to destroy evil in whatever heart it lies, and he does so with his own death on the cross. When Jesus' disciples draw their swords to defend him against his enemies, Jesus says “put that away, that's not what I'm about” (Luke 22:49-51). Instead Jesus dies praying for his enemies (Luke 23:34), taking the punishment that we deserve so that he could end evil without ending us. As one Old Testament scholar puts it:

“The Bible as a whole has a coherent understanding of divine warfare. In early times God's opposition to evil was expressed in the world through military action towards brutal people whose violence had to be stopped. But in Christ, God's opposition to evil is elevated to a whole new level. There's no contradiction between a supposed New Testament loving God and an Old Testament wrathful God. The deepest longing of the Hebrew Scriptures for a divine warrior who destroys evil is fully realised in Jesus Christ, the suffering saviour who overcame evil with good. And now we walk in his footsteps as Christians.”

One Old Testament text that gets often gets thrown up as atrocious is Psalm 137:9 – “Happy is the one who seizes your infants and dashes them against the rocks.” Again, this verse needs to be read in context, the verse before it reads: “Daughter Babylon, doomed to destruction, happy is the one who repays you _according to what you have done to us_.” According to the context, this horrific act was first done by Babylon to Israel. Psalm 137 is a desperate cry for justice, not a command to be followed by Christians.

However, this is nowhere near enough. The final verse of the Psalm reads: _Happy_ is the one who seizes your infants and dashes them against the rocks. Who would try to put a positive spin on this? For a Jew was reading this text as Scripture, I have no defense for it. But Christians are told by the Christ whom they follow, to understand how the Old Testament Scriptures point us to Christ (John 5:39, Luke 24:44). As mentioned above, Jesus elevates divine warfare to a whole new level. In the New Testament we read that “our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms” (Ephesians 6:12), and “Babylon” is used to depict all the evil that stands against God's coming kingdom (Revelation 17-18). Read in this light – a biblical theology of the enemies of God – the one who destroys the progeny and indeed the future of evil, suffering and death is Jesus himself. According to the Bible, sin gives birth to death (James 1:15), and Jesus is the one who seizes the infant of sin – death – and defeats it by his resurrection from the grave (1 Corinthians 15:55-57). Indeed, this is the Christian hope, that Jesus will one day return to put an end to pain, crying, mourning and death (Revelation 21:4), and when thinking about how to describe that day, _happy_ doesn't seem strong enough.
