---
layout: article
title: The Problem Of Evil And Suffering
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-03-23 9:00am
--- 

For many people, the presence of evil and suffering is one of the biggest objections/issues with belief in God. How can a God who is both good and all-powerful, allow all the evil and suffering that we see and experience in the world? For a number of people, this is a very sensitive issue. For those who are experiencing great suffering, the following will be at best cold comfort, and at worst, flippant and insensitive. This is an attempt to answer the philosophical problem of evil and suffering, not something to be used as a substitute for pastoral care. I will get to how Christianity is helpful for those who suffer, but I’d like to try and address the theological conundrum first.

The problem of evil/suffering is often phrased as: “if God can’t stop evil/suffering then he’s not all-powerful, and if he won’t stop evil/suffering then he’s not good, either way he can’t be both good and all-powerful.” This first part is very true, there’s no escaping the fact that if God can’t stop evil/suffering then he’s not all-powerful. But the second part has a hidden assumption that needs to be examined. Saying that “if God won’t stop evil/suffering then he’s not good” assumes that all the evil/suffering in the world is senseless, but why would we assume that? What makes us think that if there were good reasons for God to allow evil/suffering that we would be the first ones to know about it? Demanding that an all-knowing God cannot have good reasons for allowing evil/suffering, is essentially saying “I can’t think of a good reason why God would allow this, therefore there can’t be a good reason.” It’s demanding that an all-knowing God cannot know something that you don’t, namely, his reason for allowing evil/suffering. If you have a God whose big enough to be mad at for all the evil and suffering in the world, then you have to have at the same time, a God whose big enough to have reasons for allowing it that you don’t necessarily know about.

Moreover, the problem of evil assumes that there really is such a thing as objective evil. But if there is no god, then why does the death and discomfort of one particular species of primates constitute as objective evil? If Richard Dawkins is correct and “the universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil and no good, nothing but blind, pitiless indifference.” (Richard Dawkins, _River Out Of Eden_, p132), then what exactly are we objecting to? The problem of evil/suffering is felt by everyone to varying degrees, and felt by some very acutely; but according to atheism, it’s not something that we should expect at all. This is essentially what led C.S. Lewis to posit the problem of evil against atheism, rather than against theism:

> “My argument against God was that the universe seemed so cruel and unjust. Just how had I got this idea of just and unjust? A man does not call a line crooked unless he has some idea of a straight line. What was I comparing this universe with when I called it unjust? … Thus in the very act of trying to prove that God did not exist – in other words, that the whole of reality was senseless – I found I was forced to assume that one part of reality – namely my idea of justice – was full of sense. Consequently atheism turns out to be too simple.  If the whole universe has no meaning, we should never have found out that it has no meaning.” (C.S. Lewis, _Mere Christianity_, p45-46)

While this is helpful in addressing the philosophical objection, it doesn’t actually answer the question: if God is so good, why is there so much suffering in the world? On this question, I believe the Bible points us to three moments in history: the beginning of history, the centrepiece of history, and the end of history. Firstly, at the beginning of history we see that the reason why there’s so much evil and suffering in the world is because we chose it (Genesis 3). God didn’t create robots who could only obey him, but people who had the freedom to love or to hate, to live with God or without God. According to the Bible our choice to live without God has disastrous consequences for our relationships with each other and with the world, and so we experience thorns, thistles, suffering and death.

A thoughtful atheist recently pushed me on this, and asked: “Why couldn’t God create beings who could make choices and were ‘free’, whilst at the same time ensuring that they were created such that they were causally determined (in some way) to choose to follow God?” This is similar to the question: why did God create the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and forbid Adam and Eve to eat it, knowing that they would? Why not just create a garden without the tree? My response is that God wanted us to have intimate relationships with him, not consumer relationships like the relationship you have with your local supermarket. In Job chapter 1, Satan says to God “Does Job fear God for nothing? Have you not put a hedge around him and all he has?” (Job 1:8-9). He essentially accuses Job of having a consumer relationship with God: if someone else offers Job better goods at the same price, or the same goods at a better price, Job would abandon God, or so the argument goes. You can almost hear Satan saying “what’s love got to do, got to do with it?” But in the face of this accusation, God creates free lovers, and God only gives Satan enough rope to hang himself. Satan wanted to bring suffering into Job’s life in order to expose him as a fraud, but God only let Satan bring enough suffering into Job’s life to accomplish the very opposite of everything Satan wanted. Job is vindicated, and his relationship is seen to be intimate, as opposed to a mere consumer relationship (Job 42). God allows Satan to bring evil and suffering into the world so that we can be free lovers rather than consumers.

Secondly, the Bible points us to the centrepiece of history: the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus. Here we see that the reason why God allows evil/suffering can’t be because he doesn’t love us: God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us (Romans 5:8). The problem of evil/suffering is something that the authors of the Bible took very seriously. If God had of just forgiven sin without dealing with it, then the blood of all the victims of injustice that cry out to God would go unanswered. But if God demanded that we, the perpetrators of evil, paid for our sin, then God’s desire for intimate relationship with us would go unanswered. And so God came to earth as a man, and Jesus, the one against whom we have sinned, took the punishment that our sin deserves on the cross so that we might be forgiven. On the cross we see God’s justice poured out on sin, and God’s love poured out on sinners. It was a debt that had to be paid by man, but was so great that it could only be paid by God; and so Jesus comes as the God-man to pay it on our behalf.

Jesus describes the story arc of the Bible as being ‘like a man who sowed good seed in his field. But while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away. When the wheat sprouted and formed heads, then the weeds also appeared’ (Matthew 13:24-26). Since God had created everything good, the angels (the owner’s servants) ask God about the problem of evil: “The owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Where then did the weeds come from?’ ‘An enemy did this’ he replied” (Matthew 13:27-28a). God actively planted good seed, but he passively allowed the enemy to sow weeds amongst the wheat. Unsatisfied, his servants press him on how much evil he will allow to continue: “The servants asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and pull them up?’ ‘No’ he answered, ‘because while you are pulling the weeds, you may uproot the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest. At that time I will tell the harvesters: First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat and bring it into my barn’.” (Matthew 13:28b-30) Ultimately God allows sin to continue because we are caught up with it. To end evil, suffering and death would mean ending us who are entangled with – and sometimes even perpetrating – evil, suffering and death. But God is incredibly patient with us, not wanting anyone to perish (Ezekiel 18:23, 32; 33:11; 1 Timothy 2:3; 2 Peter 3:9). This is the heart of the gospel, that Jesus lived the life we should have lived, died the death we should have died, and rose that we should rise again, so that God could end all evil and suffering, without ending us.

Finally, the Bible directs us to the end of history: the coming of the kingdom where there will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain (Revelation 21:4). This is the Christian hope, and it is here where I think Christianity is not just true, but profoundly helpful. It gives us the power, resources and motivation to face the darkness of the world because of the light of hope found in the gospel. When people are confronted with the overwhelming amount of pain and suffering in the world, too often we become either crushed by the sheer weight of it, or we become desensitised and complacent with it. However, the gospel moves Christians away from both extremes. While we realise that the hurt and suffering is great, the sovereignty of God keeps us from giving up in despair or being crushed by the weight of it; and while the prevalence of suffering causes many to become desensitised and complacent with it, the love of God keeps us from becoming desensitised or complacent. The gospel moves Christians to work towards ending evil and suffering because God himself is working towards ending all evil and suffering. And the gospel prevents us from being crushed by the weight of the problem, because God is sovereign over the world, and will ultimately bring all the evil and suffering in the world to an end.

But how does Christianity help us while we’re in the midst of suffering? While most religions adopt the works theology of Job’s friends, and teach that your particular suffering is your fault because you’ve sinned either in this life or a past life (or it’s an illusion as in the case of Buddhism), the Bible gives us permission to cry out to God when we experience pain and suffering. The Psalms, Job, Habakkuk, and many other parts of the Bible invite us cry out to God, and most importantly, the gospel teaches us that we are not alone when we suffer. Joe Bayly was a father who lost three sons, and he wrote a book about his experience called _The View From A Herse_. In the book, he describes one pastor who came to him with all the right philosophical answers, and Bayly couldn’t wait to see him leave. A second pastor came in to see him with nothing but his presence and his prayers, and Bayly said that he hated to see him leave. This was actually very Christ-like. God didn’t sit up in heaven and send us an essay on the meaning of suffering. He came himself to be with us in the suffering and to help us through it. If you know someone who’s suffering, don’t be like Job’s friends, be like Jesus. Don’t give them any answers unless they ask you for them, just give them your presence and your prayers, and don’t let them go. This is when they need you the most.


