---
layout: article
title: 'Marrying Love and Truth, in the Debate about Marriage'
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-06-07 9:00am
--- 

For many, the current debate about marriage is generating more heat than light, more hate than love, and more confusion than clarity. Both sides are arguing passionately about what they believe to be the truth, and neither side is perceived as being particularly loving to the other. Instead of writing yet another piece about same-sex marriage, which side I’m on, and why; I’d like to take a step back to think about how we can marry truth and love when talking to people who disagree with us. That is, how we can avoid having to choose between the false alternatives of truth and love, but rather do both.

To make a gross over-generalisation, Christians believe that they are standing up for the truth about marriage, while those advocating for same-sex marriage believe that they are standing up for the LGBT community, and all of their opponents are being profoundly unloving towards the LGBT community. No doubt this is often the case, and many Christians have moved towards supporting the push for same-sex marriage precisely they feel the force of the argument that we’re standing against love between two people. How can Christians possibly stand against love? According to Jesus, the most important imperatives for the Christian life are to love God, and love our neighbours, including our LGBT neighbours. To be fair, some who identify as gay have also argued for the other side, often because they feel that there is a truth in the notion that marriage is between a man and a woman, and that keeping this will benefit children/society.

Do we have to choose between love and truth? Some would say yes, but I would like to argue for a strong no. Whatever you believe the truth about marriage is, surely we can discuss it in love. In fact, I would argue that both sides are arguing so passionately because they feel that something they love is being threatened. If you’re indifferent towards someone, you can compromise on the truth, and not care if/when they are being deceived. Kindness can compromise on the truth, and let pleasant conversation trump the correction of an error. But love rejoices in the truth (1 Corinthians 13:6). If you really love someone, you will be moved to speak the truth in love (Ephesians 4:15), and love in all truth (1 John 3:18). Love and truth should never be pitted against each other: speaking the truth is what we do, love is why we do it. Love speaks the hard truth precisely because it’s unloving to be silent. As E.H. Gifford put it: “The more a father loves his son, the more he hates in his son the drunkard, the liar, the traitor.”

When dealing with disagreements over the truth, we should be committed to the truth, not instead of, but precisely because, it’s the loving thing to do. When we let go of love, the truth is much harder to hear, and much harder to be heard. Indeed, when one side is calling the other names rather than listening to them, the side that feels unheard often digs their heels in deeper, and responds in kind. This does nothing to resolve the disagreement, it only aggravates it. If you want to engage with someone who has a different point of view, you simply have to make an effort to see the issue as they see it, and the best way to achieve this is often by asking them questions about their position. Lumping them in a category that they’re not in (or not wholly in) will only lead to talking past each other, and more heat rather than light. If you just want to win an argument, you will leave a trail angry people in your wake. However, if you seek to love others who disagree with you, you might actually change some people’s minds.

Socrates taught people by only asking questions, and there is much to be gained by adopting this style of conversation. To really get alongside someone, we need to enter their framework of thinking, critique their framework if necessary, and complete their framework where possible (while opening our framework to be entered, critiqued and completed as well). If we explore other people’s understanding of the truth with gentle and respectful questions (and not disagreements disguised as questions), and are always open to the possibly that we may be wrong, we can make much more progress in discovering the truth together whilst minimising relational hostility. ‘As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another’ (Proverbs 27:17). Sometimes when iron sharpens iron, the sparks fly, but all can be doused by genuine love.

Christians can and should be committed to the truth and to loving other people. Sometimes our passion for the truth can lead to a lack of love, and our passion for people can lead to a lack of zeal for truth, but this dichotomy is foreign to the pages of the Bible. Christians are to be passionate for the truth because we love others, and passionate for people because of the truth of the gospel – that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners (1 Timothy 1:15). Far from a choice between loving people and loving the truth, loving people necessitates a love for the truth, and a love for the truth of the gospel should move us to love people. Keeping the perspective of love as our ultimate end/goal/purpose, frees us to love one another in truth (1 John 3:18) without being afraid to speak the truth in love (Ephesians 4:15).
