---
layout: article
title: The Difficult Doctrine of Hell
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-03-09
--- 

Having taken the opportunity to talk to a lot of skeptics about belief in God and Christianity, one objection/issue that keeps coming up is the doctrine of hell. How could a loving God possibly punish people with an eternity of suffering? How can the thought of hell do anything other than make your stomach churn and turn you away from Christianity? This is not only an issue for unbelievers, many Christians have serious issues with the idea that many of their friends and family are facing eternal judgment because they aren’t Christians.

The objection is very easy to understand and relate to. I know lots of unbelievers who do a lot of good in the world, many whose love and good deeds put mine to shame. I certainly don’t want to see them go to hell. And while there are some really bad people who most of us would like to see punished, there’s a lot of relatively good unbelievers who appear to be trying to do what is good and right. Surely an eternity of suffering is a ridiculously excessive punishment for not worshipping the right God! This is the heart of our objection: we genuinely feel that we, and people like us, are good, and that hell is way too extreme a punishment for such upstanding law abiding citizens like us.

The problem is, that everyone thinks like this. The Stalins, Maos and Pol Pots of the world all had rational justifications for the “evil” they committed during their lifetimes. If you had of asked them, they could have all told you why they were doing what they were doing, and why they genuinely believed it to be the right thing to do. Even the worst criminals whom we consider guilty and deserving of punishment, say things like “I’m not a bad person, I’ve just had bad luck.”

However, this presents a serious problem. If those whom we consider to be deserving of punishment are blind to their own guilt, then what makes us think that we’re not blind to ours? If a criminal’s insistence on their innocence isn’t enough to establish their innocence, then why would our insistence on our innocence establish ours? We all like to think that we’re good, but that doesn't necessarily mean that we are. In a court of law, the person least qualified to pass sentence on the accused, is the accused. When it comes to my innocence/guilt before God, the person least qualified to give the verdict is me. If a criminal’s guilt can easily be in their blind spot, what makes us think that our guilt isn’t in our blind spot? Saying that you think you’re a good person isn’t enough, if our guilt really is in our blind spot, then that’s exactly what we would say.

Before we get to the Bible’s assessment of our guilt in Romans 3, it’s important to remember the context laid out in Romans 2. Both the Old Testament (Psalm 62:12; Proverbs 24:12) and the New Testament (Romans 2:6) say that “God will repay each person according to what they have done.” This should be enough to satisfy our demand for justice. Those of other religions, no religion, and people who have never heard the gospel will, according the Bible, be repaid according to what they’ve done. The question is, who is deserving of eternal life?

While we often think that people like us are good enough to avoid God’s judgment – while those whom we consider to be terrorists think the same thing about themselves – the Bible says that no one is (Romans 3:10-18). According to Jesus, our wickedness is much deeper than we realise (Mark 7:1-23). Even our good deeds spring from selfish motives, and motive is key for establishing whether something is good or bad. The difference between murder in the 1st degree, 2nd degree, 3rd degree, and manslaughter; is only a difference in motive. We call it murder when the motive is bad, and manslaughter when the motive isn’t good enough. That is, when they didn’t value human life enough to avoid the loss of life e.g. death through a doctor’s negligence, or a driver who was speeding. But no one blames a doctor for losing a patient when they did everything they could to save them, or a train driver when someone jumps in front of a train – their motive was good, they’re not guilty for the loss of life. If motive is key for determining good and evil, and if we’re relatively good because it’s beneficial to us, that is, selfishly; then perhaps we’re not quite as good as we like to think we are.

The vast majority of our objections to God’s judgment – whether it’s the flood, the conquest, or hell – all carry the assumption that we’re really not that bad, and of course you’re entitled to believe that. But objecting to what the Bible says about God’s judgment while denying what the Bible says about the human heart, is trying on part of the biblical worldview, without trying on the part that explains the part that you’re trying on. It’s like showing someone the inside of a jail, pointing out how horrible the conditions of the jail are, while they’re under the assumption that there’s no such thing as crime. According to the Bible, God made us good (Genesis 1:27, 31; Ecclesiastes 7:29), but we have made ourselves sick, very sick (Matthew 19:8). Our selfish motives underlie all of our deeds, even the ones that we consider to be good (Mark 7:6-7).

But are our motives really that bad that we deserve to go to hell? Romans 1 describes God’s judgment as God giving us over to our desires (Romans 1:24), our passions (Romans 1:26), and our minds (Romans 1:28). It is not as though God is forcing anyone’s hand to sin, or punishing people who would only turn to him if they had more information (Romans 1:19-20), God is letting people willfully walk away from him. Like the prodigal son, the Father lets him leave (Luke 15:12), but the invitation to come home is always there (Luke 15:20-24). Understood in this way, life is essentially a choice: you can choose to live with God or without God, and whatever you choose God will give you for eternity. As C.S. Lewis puts it:

> “There are only two kinds of people in the end: those who say to God, ‘Thy will be done,’ and those to whom God says, in the end, ‘Thy will be done.’ All that are in Hell, choose it. Without that self-choice there could be no Hell. No soul that seriously and constantly desires joy will ever miss it. Those who seek find. Those who knock it is opened.” (C.S. Lewis, The Great Divorce, p75)

Some object that this kind of description makes God’s justice sound passive, when it really should be described as much more active. For example, what are we to make of the declaration in Romans 9 that “God has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy, and he hardens whom he wants to harden” (Romans 9:18)? If we read the account in Exodus on which this is based; we find that Pharaoh hardens his own heart (Exodus 8:15), and then God hardens his heart (Exodus 9:12); Pharaoh’s officials harden their own hearts (Exodus 9:34) and then God hardens their hearts (Exodus 10:1). Again, Romans describes this process as God handing people over to their sin (Romans 1:24, 26, 28). Indeed every time that Pharaoh’s heart is hardened, it is in response to an act of mercy; God strikes the Egyptians with various plagues, but it is only when each plague has been lifted or it has passed, that Pharaoh’s heart is hardened towards God and his people. Our guilt before God is such that all people are without excuse (Romans 1:20), and so while Christians sometimes perceive unbelievers as those who have no chance; the Bible says that they have had every chance (Romans 1:18-23).

For many people, the objection remains: a person can be awful all of their life then decide to believe when they’re 80 years old, and that person goes to heaven; while the non-Christian who has done good and worked all their life does not go to heaven. This objection was recently answered by Tim Keller in a series on Questioning Christianity:

> “The idea that everybody, if they just summons up their will power can live a good life, I don’t believe it. Some people have really broken backgrounds. I see an enormous difference in people’s lives, I’m old enough to see this, between people who grew up with really great loving parents and people who did not. It’s a huge, huge, advantage for your ability to cope, your sense of your own well being, and your self-regard, to have doting parents, compared to people who just never had anything like that. You know that. It’s huge! You think that’s a level playing field? You think that creates equality? That everybody’s equal and those of you who try to live a good life, you should go to heaven, and those of you who have screwed up and you’ve been cruel and you’ve been nasty all your life, you’re lost? I don’t think that’s fair. I think the fairest possible way to have a basis of salvation is to say ‘all you’ve got to do is admit that you’re not so hot, that you’re not great, that you’re not good, that you need a savior.’ And the people who are not ‘allowed in’ as it were, are the proud people who say ‘hey, I shouldn’t have to beg for charity, I shouldn’t need that. I should be able to get in on my merits’.” [(Tim Keller, Questions from the Bible, from 55 minutes in)](http://www.gospelinlife.com/questions-about-the-bible-8343.html)

Ultimately, those who wish to stand on their own merits, will – God will repay each person according to what they have done (Romans 2:6), but those who stand on the merits of Jesus Christ, will do so and be saved – This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. There is no difference between Jew and Gentile, for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus (Romans 3:22-24). The Bible says that we’re more wicked than we dared believe and more loved than we dared hope. And so we’re humbled into the dust because we’re more wicked than we dared believe, and at the same time we’re affirmed to the sky because we’re more loved than we dared hope. If salvation was by works and we just lowered the bar, then those who were fortunate enough to have good parents, circumstances and moral examples would be saved, but what hope would there be for the rest of us? On the other hand, if the Bible is right, and “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Joel 2:32; Romans 10:13), then hope is freely offered to all. No one is beyond forgiveness. According to the Bible, God made us good, but we have made ourselves sick, and so Jesus gave his life so that the cure could be offered to all.
