---
layout: article
title: The Lack of Humility in Christian Certainty
author: John Hudson
date: 2015-04-19 9:00am
--- 

Christians claim to have the answers to life’s big questions. Questions about meaning/purpose, God/spiritual reality, what’s at the heart of our problems, and how they can be overcome, are often approached with humility and a desire to listen to other perspectives, but Christians often appear to have a lack of humility and even an arrogant certainty about these very big questions that various peoples, cultures, philosophers and theologians of all stripes have been wrestling with for millennia. Isn’t this profoundly hypocritical? How can Christians claim that their beliefs inspire and promote humility (e.g. Philippians 2:3-8), when they seem to be one of the very few groups who demonstrate a lack of humility in an area that most people approach with greatest humility of all?

Firstly, it’s important to understand the difference between a lack of humility, and a confidence in what you believe. Being confident about science doesn’t necessarily mean that you cannot be humble towards those who aren’t, though it certainly doesn’t guarantee that you will be humble either. People can be confident about lots of different truths without necessarily looking down on people who disagree with them. In fact, the only way to look down on people who disagree with you (about anything), is to assume that the reason that they disagree with you is because they’re somehow inferior to you. People believe lots of different things for lots of different reasons. It’s very rarely the case that they’ve seen exactly the same information that you have, presented with the same force, and they only disagree with you because they’re intellectually inferior. Moreover, it’s often the assumption of intellectual superiority that leads to conflict and hostility, and the refusal to make such assumptions that leads to respectful and charitable discussion.

Secondly, one of the factors that has led to a confusion between a confident belief and a lack of humility, is the recent change in the use of the word tolerance. A generation ago, tolerance used to mean tolerating a person with whom you disagree with, but in recent years tolerance has come to mean tolerating their point of view (rather than the person) so that there is no disagreement. In other words, tolerance used to require a disagreement, but now it requires that no such disagreement exist. D.A. Carson points out the size of this shift in _The Intolerance of Tolerance_:

> “The shift from “accepting the existence of different views” to “acceptance of different views”, from recognising other people’s right to have different beliefs or practices to accepting the differing views of other people, is subtle in form, but massive in substance. To accept that a differing or opposing position exists and deserves the right to exist is one thing; to accept the position itself means that one is no longer opposing it. The new tolerance suggests that actually accepting another’s position means believing that position to be true, or at least as true as your own. We move from allowing the free expression of contrary opinions to the acceptance of all opinions; we leap from permitting the articulation of beliefs and claims with which we do not agree to asserting that all beliefs and claims are equally valid.” (D.A. Carson, _The Intolerance of Tolerance_, p3-4)

Thirdly, while our culture is very quick to embrace the humility of those who are “seeking” or “searching”, we mustn’t forget that the whole point of seeking/searching, is to find something. To encourage people to seek/search for meaning, God, and answers to some of life’s big questions, but then discourage them from arriving at answers or convictions about them, is to completely misunderstand the very nature of what it means to seek/search – the very thing that’s being encouraged. If you want to encourage people to refrain from having convictions and beliefs about meaning, God, and life’s big questions, then you’re not actually encouraging them to be “seeking” or “searching” at all. In fact, you’re doing the exact opposite: encouraging them not to seek, search, and pursue the questions that you want them to refrain from having answers to.

Fourthly, the view that a confidence about meaning, God, and life’s big questions fosters a lack of humility, only makes sense if we’re all trying to piece together the answers in the dark. If all we have is natural theology (an understanding of God from our experience of nature), then who’s to say that my understanding is any better than yours? But if there really is a God, then the only way we could ever know anything about him is if he revealed himself to us (1 Corinthians 2:11-13). If Christianity is anything to go on, and if God has indeed revealed himself in the person and work of Jesus Christ (John 14:8-11; Hebrews 1:1-3), then listening to God’s revelation of himself isn’t the position that lacks humility. In fact, the exact opposite is true: not listening to God’s revelation of himself, or putting human speculations of God up against who God has revealed himself to be, is the height of human arrogance.

The objection that confidence about God (and all that this entails) fosters a lack of humility is often expressed in the analogy of all paths at the base of a mountain leading up the mountain, or the analogy of the blind man and the elephant, where all the different religions of the world are like blind men feeling different parts of the same elephant. While both of these analogies have the appearance of humility, there actually making precisely the kind of claims that they’re used to demonstrate that nobody should make. How would you know that all paths lead to the top of the mountain (God), unless you had the ultimate vantage point – the very thing that you’re criticising other religions for claiming to have? How could you see that the different religions are only grasping part of the elephant (God), unless you alone can see the whole – the very same claim that you’re forbidding everyone else from making. As Leslie Newbiggin writes: “There is an appearance of humility in the protestation that the truth is much greater than any one of us can grasp, but if this is used to invalidate all claims to discern the truth it is in fact an arrogant claim to a kind of knowledge which is superior to all others.” (Lesslie Newbigin, _The Gospel in a Pluralist Society_, p9-10)

Such claims about all religions having part of the truth but not the whole, are not inclusive of other religions, they’re exclusive of all religions that teach that their path is _the_ path to God. Far from being inclusive of these religious traditions, it is making yet another exclusive claim about spiritual reality that is in competition with many others. Everybody makes exclusive claims about spiritual reality, the amount of disagreement around the world makes it impossible not to. The question upon which humility and tolerance depends, isn’t which claims are more or less exclusive than others, but which exclusive claims lead people to treat others who disagree with them with love and respect. At the centre of Christianity you have a man who dies for people who don’t believe in him, while praying for those who are persecuting him. To the degree that Christians are those who follow Christ, Christianity will be a view that fosters love, humility, and respect towards people who have different views.

